---
layout: post
title: "RSVP by January 26 - Join us and show your support"
date: 2016-01-21
lead: ""
---

As you are aware, we have all been very busy collecting both signed postcards and online signatures as part of our "**I Stand with the Standing Committee**" campaign. We are still gathering both - and the numbers are growing - but we are going ahead with our planned event to pass all we have to Mr. Bernier/Premier Clark next week.

Representatives of PAN will be presenting the materials to staff at Premier Clark's office on **Tuesday January 26th**. We will need a large group of parents/PAN members to attend to show support (numbers) as we are pushing this to the media (on Monday) in the hopes of getting coverage and generating greater awareness within the Vancouver parent community.

**We need your support and attendance!**
* **WHo**: As many parents as we can get to attend
* **What**: Present all our postcards and online signatures to the Liberal government. Make a stand and a show with people and signage.
* **Where**: #740 - 999 Canada Place, World Trade Centre, Vancouver, BC  V6C 3E1. It's Premier Clark's Vancouver office and it's staffed. 
* **When**: Tues Jan 26 at 10am (should be done within 30min or so)

Please RSVP BY **Saturday January 23rd** by emailing us at [parentadvocacynetwork@gmail.com](mailto:parentadvocacynetwork@gmail.com)

We need to know how big our group will be and work on the final logistics before Tuesday. We hope we can count on you to make time to show your support.

~ Andrea Sinclair for PAN
