---
layout: post
title: "BC Budget 2016: Proposed K-12 Funding"
date: 2016-04-01
lead: "Why has the government de-prioritized public education?"
---

**Update April 26**: Please read these questions in conjunction with our April 26 post which contains some answers as well as some updates/corrections to the figures in this document.  
​
**News Release**  
**Questions**  

**April 1, 2016**  
**“Why has the government de-prioritized public education?”** Parent Advocacy Network for Public Education Questions BC Budget 2016 

**VANCOUVER** -- Following the February 16 announcement of BC Budget 2016, and in anticipation of the Ministry of Education budget estimates being discussed in the Legislature, members of the Parent Advocacy Network for Public Education (PAN) have been examining the funding figures and have posed a number of questions about the K-12 education budget. 

Taking into account inflation, Ministry of Education funding has fallen by 11% since 2002. Furthermore, the percentage of nominal GDP that BC spends on education as a function has also decreased since 2002. Economic growth has not been reflected in education funding. Our over-arching question is “Why has the government de-prioritized public education?” 

Supporting this over-arching question are several detail-oriented questions that result from a close examination of the education funding figures. As citizens, parents, and taxpayers in British Columbia, PAN members are looking for answers to these questions in order to understand how funding is allocated to the school districts, independent (private) schools, and other partners. 

PAN has submitted these questions to the BC Liberal government, the NDP opposition, the Green Party, and the Independent MLAs in the Legislature, as well as to the media. PAN hopes to gain a better understanding of the budget details in the answers to these questions. PAN also hopes that by asking these questions, and prompting others to ask them too, some light will be shed on the stark reality that education funding in BC is inadequate. It is time to take action to put education back in the priority position it deserves. 
-30- 

**Supporting Resources**  
* Web: [https://panvancouver.github.io/]()
* Twitter: [@PAN_Vancouver](http://www.twitter.com/PAN_Vancouver)
* Facebook: [www.facebook.com/PANVancouver]()
* Email: [parentadvocacynetwork@gmail.com](mailto:parentadvocacynetwork@gmail.com)


**About the Parent Advocacy Network**  
The Parent Advocacy Network for Public Education (PAN), formed in 2015, is a grassroots collective of parents from over 49 schools (and growing) across Vancouver who share a commitment to public education. Our mission is to connect parents across the district to support one another in advocacy. The network enables us to share information, experiences and stand together in protecting public education. 

Media Contacts  
Jennifer Stewart, [604-790-9929](tel:604-790-9929), [jenniferjoanstewart@gmail.com](mailto:jenniferjoanstewart@gmail.com) 