---
layout: post
title: "PAN Presents to BC's Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services on Budget 2017"
date: 2016-09-20
lead: "On September 19, 2016, Maggie Milne Martens of PAN presented to the Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services about our desire that education be a top priority for Budget 2017."
---

On September 19, 2016, Maggie Milne Martens of PAN [presented](/downloads/pan_presentation_to_the_ssc_sept_19_2016_endnotes.pdf) to the Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services about our desire that education be a top priority for Budget 2017.

Our summary
**Parent Advocacy Network affirms:**
* The recommendations of the last two Select Standing Committees to provide adequate, stable and sustainable funding to school boards to provide all children with the educational opportunities they need to reach their full potential.
**We further request:**
* The overhaul of the current funding formula to reflect the true costs of operating schools, to provide the supports and resources needed to meet the diversity of educational needs and offer a comprehensive, quality education that includes the arts.  
* To rescind the 95% capacity mandate and adequately fund infrastructure and capital projects to ensure that all children are provided with safe, educationally appropriate facilities, without sacrificing the quality or breadth of their education through cost cutting measures.
* To partner across ministries to include education as part of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy through the Seismic Mitigation Plan to expand the number of neighbourhood schools that include early childhood learning and care and crucial family supports and programs that serve community needs. 

We were not alone in advocating for public education. [PENS](/downloads/pens_presentation_to_ssc_for_budget_2017.pdf) and [FACE](/downloads/facesubmission-final.pdf) also presented in Vancouver.

While they will hopefully hear from many more on the importance of public education, the more the message is amplified, the more likely it is to have an impact. While the committee has moved on from Vancouver, you can still let them know how the current underfunding is affecting you, your children, and your community by sending in a written, audio or video submission or complete an [online survey](https://www.leg.bc.ca/Pages/BCLASS-Legacy.aspx#https%3A%2F%2Fwww2.leg.bc.ca%2Fcmt%2Ffinance%2Fsurvey.asp) (deadline, October 14, 2016). (More information is available in our [September 2, 2016 blog](/2016/09/02/time-to-sign-up).)

The Committee will issue a report in November, making recommendations to the Finance Minister for the upcoming budget. 
