---
layout: post
title: "Budget 2019"
date: 2019-02-22
lead: "Budget 2019 includes a large increase in funding for capital projects, such as new school construction and the Seismic Mitigation Program. However, operating funding is essentially maintained at the same level, with additional funding only for meeting the requirements flowing from the teachers’ win at the Supreme Court of Canada and for increased enrolment. There are no funds to bring back programs that have been lost to cuts, nor are there funds directed to addressing the inclusion and equity issues that families across BC are experiencing."
---

Budget 2019 includes a large increase in funding for capital projects, such as new school construction and the Seismic Mitigation Program. However, operating funding is essentially maintained at the same level, with additional funding only for meeting the requirements flowing from the teachers' win at the Supreme Court of Canada and for increased enrolment. There are no funds to bring back programs that have been lost to cuts, nor are there funds directed to addressing the inclusion and equity issues that families across BC are experiencing.

Background:
Select Standing Committee on Finance & Government Services
* PAN presented on Oct 11
* [Final Report on the Budget 2019 Consultation](https://www.leg.bc.ca/content/CommitteeDocuments/41st-parliament/3rd-session/fgs/FGS_2018-11-15_Budget2019Consultation_Report_Web.pdf) included the following recommendations for K-12 Education in the 2019 Budget:
    * Capital Funding
        * 61\. Increase capital funding to school districts to build new schools, maintain and upgrade existing facilities, conduct seismic upgrades, and add classroom space and playgrounds.
    * Operational Funding and Funding Formula
        * 64\. Provide sustainable, predictable funding based on a child-centered model that allows school districts to cover the costs of delivering education.
        * 65\. Fund compensation increases for exempt staff, principals and vice-principals, and provide flexibility at the local level for principals and vice-principals to take on teaching roles, particularly in rural and remote areas facing challenges with recruitment and retention.
        * 66\. Fund the provision of an age-appropriate sexual health curriculum for all grades that includes matters of consent and online safety, with the assistance of qualified sexual health educators.
        * 67\. Encourage partnerships with, and provide stable, long-term funding to, independent organizations that provide supportive, community-based programming for children and youth, such as the Boys and Girls Club, Roots of Empathy, Right to Play’s Aboriginal Youth Program, the BC School Fruit and Vegetable Nutritional Program, and FIRST Robotics; and support alternative curricular programs, such as Take a Hike. 
    * ​Students with Special Needs
        * 69\. Increase funding for students with special needs, including funding for early identification, the provision of appropriate support programs, and the training and recruitment of specialized teachers.
        * 70\. Establish clear standards and fully fund appropriate supports for students with special needs in the public and independent school systems.